Introduction
------------

DriveSE designed for use as part of a larger model set for designing and analyzing wind turbines and plants and are meant to replace a current set of models based on technology from the late 1990's :cite:`Sunderland_1993`.  In the older model set, semi-empirical formulations were developed for all major wind turbine components in order to provide the mass of each which could be then converted into cost for an overall turbine capital cost estimate. These semi-empirical formulations were based on a collected industry database that is not representative of present MW size wind turbines, resulting in significant discrepancies between the predictions and actual designs. There is a need to develop an accurate drivetrain sizing tool to optimize designs for reducing cost of energy. 

Wind turbine drivetrains connect the rotor to the tower. Therefore, the drivetrain model interacts with the rotor and tower designs. The rotor design parameters, such as overhung distance, rotor weight and size, are important input parameters for DriveSE.  The resulting mass estimates can then be used to feed into an overall hub and nacelle model to get estimates of overall hub and nacelle masses for use in other system models including the wind turbine tower as well as cost models for the balance of station and operational expenditures.  The individual masses of all components can also be used in a turbine capital cost model.  Thus, while DriveSE can be used to do drivetrain specific analysis as illustrated in :cite:`Drive_2014`, the model set can also be used as part of larger wind turbine and plant system level studies :cite:`tip_speed_2014`.

DriveSE performs a similar function but uses a more rigorous set of physics-based analyses to estimate the size of a subset of components (the low speed shaft, main bearing(s), gearbox and bedplate) or uses parametric formulations representative of current wind turbine technology for the remaining components (the hub and yaw system). The model fidelity levels range from simple parametric to full physics-based models with internal iteration schemes for sizing components based on different system constraints.  DriveSE considers three-point and four-point drivetrain configurations with gearboxes and high speed generators.  Medium-speed and direct-drive configurations are outside the scope of the work presented here and will be addressed in future model versions.  Furthermore, the gearbox model of DriveSE includes several layouts of parallel and planetary gear stages.  In all cases, the loads are fed into the models from the rotor and at this time, extreme loads are used to size all components with the exception on the shaft sizing model.  The constraints on system design are also used in practice for designing commercial components.  The particular design methodology and limitations of that methodology for each component are discussed in the model description section of the report.

Geared drivetrains, the most prevalent design for land-based wind turbines, consist of a main shaft, main bearing(s), gearbox, generator coupling, and generator. Different rotor supports and bearing configurations are used across various manufacturers, which can be grouped into four categories: 1) three-point suspension, 2) two-main-bearing suspension (four-point suspension), 3) integrated drivetrain, and 4) Pure Torque hub support. In the three-point suspension, the rear main bearing is integrated into the gearbox at the planetary stage as the planetary carrier bearing. The two-main-bearing suspension uses two separate main bearings that ideally carry all the nontorque loads from the rotor and transmit them into the tower through the bedplate. The integrated drivetrain has the main bearings integrated into the gearbox. The nontorque loads are transmitted through the gearbox housing. The Pure Torque hub support is distinct from the others as it uses a set of circumferential flexible couplings to connect the rotor with the main shaft thus isolating any nontorque loads from the drivetrain. Among all different drivetrain configurations, the three-point suspension and two-main-bearing suspension (four-point suspension) are most common, which are modeled in DriveSE.



The drivetrain designs calculated using the developed models are compared against actual industry data or high fidelity finite element analysis. For the physics-based models, verification is performed against higher fidelity finite-element models for key design criteria.  This involved creating representations of each component for different sizes - using data on real turbine components where possible.  An iterative process was used to evaluate the DriveSE model in comparison to the higher fidelity model and corrections to the DriveSE models were made as necessary.  For both the physics-based and parametric models, validation of each model is performed against available industry data on component sizes.  Given the simplifications of the DriveSE models, final scaling factors were included with some the DriveSE models in order to calibrate them with the industry data and to account for design factors that were outside of the current scope.